## The Wasatch Fault Zone
* 350 km long, extends from ~Fayette, UT to Malad City, Idaho 
* Is a normal fault that dips to the west
   * New research following the Magna Earthquake suggests that it is a listric fault, meaning it gets less steep with depth 
   * Normal fault is a fault that is being pulled apart, so that one side slides down relative to the other side. 
* It is not one long, continuous fault. Is composed of 10 individual faults that are ~30-60 km long called fault segments. 
* The five central faults are the most recently active and are capable of producing M7-7.5 earthquakes 
   * Brigham City, Weber, Salt Lake City, Provo, and Nephi 
   * The recurrence interval is ~900-1300 years. This has been determined by studying historic earthquakes and determining how often large earthquakes typically occur on each fault segment. 
   * There have been at least 22 large earthquakes in the last 6000 years on the central portion of the wasatch fault zone 
* Most recent large earthquakes:
   * Weber, Provo, Nephi - occurred 200-700 years ago 
   * Salt Lake City - 1200-1600 years ago 
   * Brigham City - 2200-2800 years ago  
   
  https://www.usgs.gov/natural-hazards/earthquake-hazards/science/how-big-and-how-frequent-are-earthquakes-wasatch-fault?qt-science_center_objects=0#qt-science_center_objects 


## Magna Earthquake Sequence
* The mainshock was a M5.7
* 11.9 km below sea level, 13.2 km beneath the surface
* This is the largest earthquake recorded on seismic instruments in Utah 
* No serious injuries or fatalities 
* Estimated damage is greater than $150 million 
* For a circular rupture the fault radius is 2.3 km, fault area is 16 km2 , average slip is 0.28 m, and stress drop is 8.3 MPa. 
   * M0 calculation uses near source density of 2.3 g/cm3 and shears velocity of 3.5 km/s 
   
  (Pang et al., 2020)


## Intensity
* This is used to describe local shaking and is determined by damages and the experience of those who felt it 
* Most common scale is the Mercalli scale, which ranges from I to XII
   * I - felts by a few people
   * V - felt by most people
   * VIII -damage to some structures
   * XIII - “total destruction”   
   
(Shearer 290)


## Magnitudes 
* Is a way of describing how big an earthquake
* “A relative size scale based on measurements of seismic phase amplitudes” (Lay and Wallace 379)
* “A unit increase in magnitude corresponds to a 10-fold increase in amplitude of ground displacement” (Lay and Wallace 380)
* It is possible for an earthquake to have several different magnitude estimates depending on the waves and frequencies used in the calculation - (Lay and Wallace 15)
* The largest earthquake ever was a 9.5 and had a rupture area that was ~1000 km long and 150 km wide. Earthquake size is limited by the area available for rupture, making very large magnitudes impossible (https://www.usgs.gov/natural-hazards/earthquake-hazards/science/earthquake-facts-earthquake-fantasy?qt-science_center_objects=0#qt-science_center_objects)


## Seismic Moment 
* Seismic Moment (M0) relates directly to the size of an earthquake
   * M0 = (shear modulus)*(displacement)*(fault surface area)
* This is the ideal way to measure the size of an earthquake because it is related to physical properties but it can be hard to calculate
*  Is approximately proportional to the average radiated seismic energy (Shearer)
* The moment magnitude Mw relates M0 to another magnitude (Ms) based on the amplitude of seismic waves (Lay and Wallace)
   * Mw = (⅔)*logM0-6.07 - (Udías et al.14; Shearer 284) 
   * A unit increase in magnitude is ~ 32 times increase in moment/energy (Shearer)
   * Energy difference of 2 magnitudes: 10^(1.5*(M2-M1)) 
   * Log E = 5.24 + 1.44*Mw (I need to check this)
 
## A good summary on magnitude, energy release, and intensity:
https://www.usgs.gov/natural-hazards/earthquake-hazards/science/earthquake-magnitude-energy-release-and-shaking-intensity?qt-science_center_objects=0#qt-science_center_objects </br>


## Earthquake statistics and aftershocks: 
* Gutenberg-Richter Law: “...logarithm of the number of earthquakes greater than a certain magnitude decreases linearly with magnitude” (Udías et al.)
* Omori’s Law: “the number of aftershocks following a main shock decreases as an inverse power of time” (Udías et al.)
* Mainshock causes major stress changes in the area nearby. Aftershocks may be generated by readjustments to the new stress state.(Lay and Wallace 385)
* Having an earthquake does not release enough stress to prevent a larger earthquake later. Having an earthquake slightly increases the chance of a larger earthquake happening in the next couple of days by ~5%. (https://www.usgs.gov/faqs/what-probability-earthquake-a-foreshock-a-larger-earthquake?qt-news_science_products=0#qt-news_science_products; https://quake.utah.edu/special-events/2020-magna-earthquake-sequence-faq)


## Depth 
* Earthquake depth in Utah is usually… (I still need to find an actual source for this but it is ~5-25km I think)
* The depth of an earthquake can affect how the shaking feels. A deeper earthquake is less intense but is felt farther away. A shallower earthquake is more intense but shakes a smaller area. Similarly, the closer a flashlight is to a table, the brighter and smaller the radius of light is. As you pull the flashlight away from the table it gets dimer and the radius gets larger.  (https://quake.utah.edu/special-events/2020-magna-earthquake-sequence-faq)


## References 
Lay, T., & Wallace, T. C. (1995). Modern global seismology. San Diego: Acad. Press.  
Udías, A., Madariaga, R., & Buforn, E. (2014). Source mechanisms of earthquakes: Theory and practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
Shearer, P. M. (2009). Introduction to Seismology (2nd ed.). London: Cambridge University Press.  
Pang, G., Koper, K. D., Mesimeri, M., Pankow, K. L., Baker, B., & Farrell, J., et al. (2020). Seismic analysis of the 2020 Magna, Utah, earthquake sequence: Evidence for a listric Wasatch fault. ​Geophysical Research Letters​, 47,e2020GL089798.  
